Radiolab Extra: Henrietta Lacks 35:13

https://www.wnycstudios.org/story/radiolab-extra-henrietta-lacks/

JA-Jad Abumrad

RK-Robert Krulwich
 

JA: Alright, so tonight is the premiere of a move we’re really excited about. It’s called the Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks. It stars an up and coming actress, maybe you’ve heard of her, Oprah Winfrey.

 

0:02:30

 

JA: And it is based on the book of a very very dear friend, Rebecca Skloot. Best selling book. You’ll be able to watch the movie in a couple days on HBO, but in the meantime we’re just so proud of Rebecca. Thrilled that this movie is getting out to a wider audience because everyone should know this story. SO in honor of that, we’re gonna play for you a documentary that we produced with Rebecca. We worked on it for a few years with her while she was sort of formulating the book. And it includes tape that you won’t hear anywhere else.

 

0:02:58

 

RS: We can move me closer

 

ROBOT: Hello, hello

 

JA: And the story

 

RS: OK

 

This story is about a tumor that expands and never stops. Begins in 1950 a black woman in Baltimore is in her bathroom and she discovers pretty much all on her own that she has cancer

It’s all a bit of a mystery how she initially knew this, but she knew it was there.

 
A knot she called it. She had told her cousins for awhile that she thought there was something wrong her, with her womb. And she climbed into her bathtub and she slid her fingers up inside of herself and found this lump

 

JA: Chapter 1

 
First she went into her local doctor

 

HJ: By chance I happened to be an attending at that time

JA: The guy she eventually ended up seeing at Johns Hopkins University was this fellow, Dr. Howard Jones

 
HJ: I’m 98, next month I’ll be 99

JA: Wow. So when she came in to see you, can you tell me anything about what she

was like?

 

HJ: Well she was a--

JA: You don’t remember anything?

HJ: No I really don’t

JA: But you remember her tumor, right?

HJ: Oh absolutely. I never saw anything like it before or after. And this didn’t look like a normal tumor. It was, it was deep purple and about as big as a quarter, sort of shiny. Very soft. That was another thing about it.When you touched it, you might think it was red and jello. There was something really strange about the way it looked

 
So doctors took a sample. They would cut off these little teeny tiny pieces and put it in a tube. And one would go to the lab for diagnosis. And in this case, since it was Hopkins. They would take an extra piece and give it to a man named George Gey

 
Guy was a researcher who worked at Hopkins. He had a deal with the clinic that anytime they got a patient with cervical cancer, they’d give him a tiny piece of the tumor.

His main mission--actually not just his, scientists everywhere were trying to do this, they wanted to find a way to grow human cells outside of a human being in a dish. George Gey had been trying to do this, working on this for decades

This is like the basic thing you need to study human biology. It’s like having a little tiny bit of a person in it, in a lab that’s detached from then so that you can do whatever you want with them. You know, you can’t bombard some person with a bunch of drugs and just wait to see how much they can tolerate before their cells all explode.

 

0:05:33

 

RS: But you can do that in cell culture, so--

 

JA: Oh, so this is like, this is like the basic thing you need to study human biology?

 

RS: Mhm

 

JA: You need cells in a dish

 

RS: Yes

 

JA: Problem was, anytime they tried to grow human cells in a dish [knocking]

 

MK: My dog--come here

 

They would die

 

MK: Yeah they die.

 

This is George Gey’s former lab assistant

 

JA: Can you just tell me your name? You know, my name is so and so

MK: My name is Mary, I’ll put my maiden name in there.

JA: Oh sure

MK: Toy Kubichek

 

0:06:03

 

JA: Mary lives just outside Baltimore, about an hour where she used to work with George Gey

 

MK: This is--this is Dr. Gey

 

She showed me some pictures

 

MK: And he’s sitting at a microscope

JA: Look at him, he looks--he seems like a really big guy, a really tall guy

MK: He was a big guy

 

At least 6’5”, judging from the picture

 

MK: Yeah, he was

 

And in every slide that she showed me, he had kind of a crazy smile on his face

 

JA: Like he’s got a, like he’s having a good time

MK: He’s like a big bear of a man is what I always thought

JA: Oh yeah

 

In any case, Mary says they were completely stumped at why the human cells always died

 

0:6:33

 

JA: But they just did

MK: Yeah

 

So, on the day that George Gey walked in, handed Mary a tube of a little chunk of a nameless woman’s cervical cancer inside

 

MK: I knew nothing about her

 

No one expected anything

 

MK: No, he was doing--well, he probably was ever hopeful, but you know. I was eating lunch and I thought, oh the heck with it, you o

know, it’s not gonna grow. I’m gonna finish this sandwich. And that’s what I did

 

JA: Three

 

MK: Then I went in and

 

0:07:00

 

She gave the cells some food

 

MK: Did my usual

 

Turned on all the machines and left, came back the next day. They hadn’t died. So she came back the next day. And they were growing. And then the next day. Still growing.

 

MK: They just kept plugging along.

 

And the next

 

RS: They grew a lot

 

JA: Rebecca says they doubled in size

 

RS: Every 24 hours

 

MK: Yeah

 

RS: They just grew

 

MK: All of a sudden, you know, I had--kept transferring them and making more tubs, kept transferring them, making more tubes and transferring--they were very reliable

 

RS: And stronger

 

MK: They just kept plugging along, plugging along

 

0:07:35

 

JA: Meanwhile, the woman who had spawned all these cells died

 
//////////

RS: Right. Officially she died of uremia, which is toxicity of the blood because she was’t able to get rid of the toxic waste that usually goes out in your urine

 

MK: Plugging along, plugging along

 

But not her cells

 

MK: Plugging along

 

CLIP: And to tell us this story, it’s a privilege to introduce Dr. George Gey

 

JA: It wasn’t long after that George Gey appeared on TV, holding in his hand a little bottle

 

0:07:59

 

CLIP, GG: Now let me show you a bottle

 

MK: Plugging along

 

CLIP, GG: In which we have grown massive quantities of cancer cells

 

MAN: So did you want to look at the photos and--

 

JA: You can’t really get a sense of how aggressive this tumor was until you go to the Hopkins archives and look at George Gey’s pictures and videos.

 

MAN: OK, this is the film can here that cell film

 

Then it hits you

 

CLIP, GG: These are enlarged ten thousand times

 

JA: Oh my god

 

Swirling, hurricanes of cells

 

JA: Just like thousands of little pods

 

CLIP, GG: Some small, and some very large

 

0:08:31

 

JA: Clumped together

MK: Kept transferring them, making more tubes

 

CLIP, GG: See them under the microscope

 

JA: It looks like something has just exploded

MK: Plugging along

 

CLIP, GG: They’re going to make--

 

JA: That’s amazing

MK: They just kept plugging along

 

CLIP: They just keep getting bigger and bigger

 

RS: Stronger

 

CLIP: It’s indestructible, it’s indescribable, nothing can stop it

 

RS: Why hers just sort of took off and grew and the other ones that they had tried before didn’t is just a little bit of a mystery. Nobody really knows.

 

JA: Four

 

0:09:00

 

JA: Nonetheless, George Gey knew what he had. This new cell line was what they’d all been waiting for. So early on, right after this woman died, George Gey sent Mary back down to get more cancer cells from the corpse

 

MK: Oh, he sent me down to the morgue yeah

JA: Really

MK: Oh yeah. SO I went down there and the coroner, I don’t know who he was. Dr. Guy was there too and they were standing down at her feet sort of.

JA: Meanwhile she’s like what?

MK: She’s lying out there, she’s already open

 

0:09:30

 

MK: I got some samples. The coroner would take them out and give them to me

JA: What’d she look like?

MK: I couldn’t look at her face. I couldn’t look at her. The only thing I looked at were her

toes and they had chipped nail polish on them and that was really like, Oh this is a real person.

JA: What was it about the nail polish that hit you?

 

MK: Because it was chipped. Because you know she hadn’t been able to take care of

her nails for a long time if they got chipped like that.

 

0:10:00

 

MK: And it showed that she was proud of herself. Not everyone wears nail polish on their

 

 

 

JA: Yeah. Yeah

 

JA: Over the next several months, while this woman’s body lay decomposing in the ground, George Gey and Mary produced hundreds of thousands of her cells, her tumor cells. And he named them the HeLa strain

 

RK: HeLa?

 

JA: Like HeLa. H-E-L-A.

 

RK: Uh huh

 

JA: No one would actually know why he had named them that for about two decades.

 

RK: Hm

 

JA: But what he did with these cells, you know, would be unusual nowadays

 

0:10:32

 

Like if somebody now found a cell that was special, they’d run off to the patent office and then sell is to MERC for a billion bucks

 

RK: [laughs]

 

JA: But George Gey?

 

MK: He just passed them out freely

 

Didn’t try to make any money off

 

JA: [inaudible]

MK: Because it was this nice, new thing that could help science

 

Mary says that George Gey began to send HeLa all over the world.

 

MK: Yep

 

And pretty soon she was in hundred of labs

 

RS: And, you know, this was in the midst of the polio epidemic

 

CLIP: This is the season when polio is at its worst

 

JA: WE’re talking early 50s, right?

 

RS: Yeah. So this is 1951, 52, you know

 

0:11:02

 

RS: Schools are being closed, kids are being kept inside

 

CLIP: To this cruel disease, medical science still has no complete answer

 

RS: There was this enormous effort to develop a polio vaccine

 

JA: Problem was, in order to develop a vaccine, you had to have enough poliovirus, you know, enough quantity to be able to study in a lab. And they had no way of making enough

 

RK: So what’d they do?

 

JA: Well, one of the guys that Gey--one of the guys that Guy had sent the cells to

 

RS: This collaborator friend of Gey’s

 

JA: Discovered something kind of amazing

 

0:11:30

 

JA: Which was that polio loved the HeLa cell. Put polio inside a HeLa cell, HeLa would copy, and in the process would make more polio

 

RK: So it’s the super xerox cell, no matter what you wanna do--make a copy, make a copy, make a copy.

 

JA: yeah. So now they had a way of making polio

 

RS: HeLa could just be a polio factory

 

JA: And so the government made a factory

 

RS: But the Tuskegee Institute

 

JA: A real one

 

Rs: Literally a factory so they had these big, you know, stainless steel vats of culture medium that were sort of rotated constantly

 

0:12:00

 

RS: Autoclaves for sterilizing other equipment, a row with you know, four or five microscopes, crazy Frankenstein-ish gizmos. They had this machine that was like an automatic cell dispenser and it had this sort of long mechanical arm that would squirt a certain amount of this culture medium with HeLa cells into a tube

 

JA: Wow this is ike the beauty of industry right here

 

RS: Yeah it is absolutely

 

JA: The cells that were produced at this factory, she says, were used to test the polio vaccine

 

CLIP: The potent vaccine to prevent the dreaded disease

 

0:12:30

 

RS: The tests they were doing were enormous. It was the largest field trial ever done. At it’s peak, the Tuskegee HeLa production center was producing about six trillion cells a week

 

JA: Wow

 

RS: Which is kind of inconceivable

 

JA: But that was actually only the beginning, says Rebecca, because this factory led to an even bigger one that was for profit

 

RS: Right.

 

JA: and that second factory

 

RS: Was the first time any human biological material was commercialized

 

JA: So this was the first biotech company

 

RS: Yeah, basically

 

0:13:00

 

JA: OK, but when the first started mass producing HeLa, what sorts of things were done to these cells? What sorts of problems were investigated?

 

RS: Like anything you can imagine. So they infected HeLa cells with every kind of virus. Hepatitis, ecoin, encephalitis virus. Yellow fever. Herpes. Measles, mumps, rabies, whatever. Like you just, any vaccine. And this was just an--this was a revolution for scientists. There was research on chemotherapy drugs, HeLa cells went up in some of the first space missions

 

JA: Realyl?

 

0:13:30

 

RS: Yeah, so they were--

 

JA: HeLa went into space?

 

RS: HeLa went into space, which everytime I think about it I hear, HeLa in space. [laughter]

 

JA: Why? Just because?

 

RS: the premise was to see what happens to human cells in zero gravity, you know, if we’re gonna be sending people up into space, what’s going to happen to them up there?

 

JA: Oh

 

RS: So HeLa went up before any humans did. And then she eventually went up--she. The cells--

 

JA: that was an interesting little slip up there.

 

RS: yeah, I know [laughter]

 

0:13:58

 

JA: OK, so let’s actually skip forward in the story to the point where that, that slip up you just heard, that pronoun confusion gets… personal, you know.

 

RS: Well, what happens?

 

JA: OK it’s the late 60s

 

RS: Mhm

 

JA: and HeLa has led to a revolution in science and now there are hundreds of cell lines, not just HeLa, but hundreds. And somewhere along the way, scientists discover that HeLa is so aggressive that she’s actually be contaminating and taking over all of these other cell lines

 

RK: You just she. But I get your point

 

0:14:31

 

JA: [laughs] and she doesn’t know--it does it in the strangest way

 

RS: HeLa cells can you know, they can float on dust particles. They can ride on--

 

JA: They can what?

 

RS: Um--

 

JA: They can float on dust particles?

 

RS: Yeah, so they can--

 

JA: you mean they can hop out of a dish and just get on a particle and jsut floar?

 

RS: Mhm.

 

JA: Out the door

 

RS: up the stairs

 

JA: Down the hall

 

RS: One HeLa cell

 

JA: Into a lab

 

RS: Drops into

 

JA: Into a dish

 

RS: a cell culture where there’s other cells growing

 

0:15:00

 

RS: and because HeLa cells are sort of powerful cells, they take over.

 

JA: So on the heels of this catastrophe, someone at Hopkins decides to make a test. Let’s make a test that will allow us to genetically determine if a cell is HeLa or if it isn’t. And to make a long story short, this desire for a genetic test led scientists, and then journalists, to ask a questions which amazingly for 25 years had not been asked

 

0:15:31

 

JA: Who was this woman? And that’s when we found out her name. Henrietta Lacks.

 

CLIP: [shuffling]

 

JA: This is the sound of Rebecca reading Henrietta's medical records for the first time

 

RS: [shuffling] This is a 30 year old colored woman

 

She’s sitting with Henrietta’s youngest daughter, Deborah

 

RS: This is the second of November, so this is again when she was pregnant with you

DL: Mhm

 

0:16:01

 

Henrietta had five kids when she died at the age of 31. Most have no memory of her, because they were too young. And that’s especially true of Deborah.

 

DL: I was only 15 months old and I don’t remember anything about my mother.

 

RS: Yeah so she--you know, she had spent her entire life just sort of longing to know who her mother was and did she like dancing

 

DL: you know I always wanted to know what she liked to do, where she went, what she liked to eat

 

RS: Did she breastfeed Deborah? She was really sort of almost fixated on that idea. She wanted to know if she was breastfed

 

0:16:32

 

DL: Oh I don’t--I don’t know what I would give up just to, just to have her here, I’ll tell you. Just to see her and hold her

 

JA: So in 1973 when a scientist calls the Lacks family and Deborah hears that little bits of the mother that she never knew are still alive. And oh by the way can we take a blood test from you and your family because we’re having some contamination problem. We need to use genetic markers, blah blah blah. Wella s you could imagine

 

0:17:00

 

DL: Took my by surprise, it really did.

 

It was really confusing

 

DL: I mean, how much is that--how much of her cells is out there? You know

 

Eventually she went online, did some searches, and found

 

RS: Thousands and thousands of hits.

 

JA: Like for instance on HeLa clones.

 

RS: and Deborah had heard various journalists in the past had come to her and mentioned Dolly the cloned sheep and said, you know, your mom--they did this with your mom too. Meaning, that’s actually where the technology started. The first cells that were cloned her HeLa cells, but that was just cloning a cell. Not cloning an entire being

 

0:17:31

 

RS: But that distinction is very complicated, particularly for somebody who doesn’t know what a cell is

 

JA: yeah

 

RS: So Deborah between what journalists had told her and googling Henrietta Lacks and clone, thought there were thousands of clones of her mother around.

 

JA: Really. You mean like a bunch of Henriettas?

 

RS: thousands

 

JA: Walking the streets?

 

RS: walking around.

 

JA: And Rebecca says that one of Deborah’s biggest fears was bumping into one of these clones

 

RS: She said, you know, she would say, I would have to go talk to her and she wouldn’t know I was her daughter, and I don’t know if I could handle that.

 

0:18:00

 

JA: wow

 

RS: it sounds so fantastical. Like how could someone believe that there were copies of her mother walking around? But at one point, 25 years after their mother died, someone called and said, Hey, part of her is still alive and we’ve grown enough of her so that it could wrap around the Earth several times.

 

JA: At that point all bets are off

 

RS: Yeah, right. Exactly.

 

JA: Not to mention that it’s actually not that crazy. Because your DNA is in your cells, so if your cells are taken out of you and they still grow, well isn’t that still you?

 

0:18:30

 

JA: Alive?

 

RK: It’s of you, but it’s clearly not you, and it’s going on and on and that’s--it’s a funny middle space, that’s for sure.

 

JA: yeah. So here’s what happened. As Rebecca went off in search of Henrietta Lacks, every so often, Deborah would come along and sit with her as they interviewed you know, anyone they could find. Friends, family, and eventually, o ver many many years, a picute does emerge.

 

0:19:00

 

JA: Of who this woman was

 

RS: She was born in Roanoke

 

JA: 1920, Virginia

 

RS: and I think she was the tenth of the eleven children.

 

JA: But apparently she was the one that stood out

 

RS: Everybody talked about her as just being, you know, she was the catch

 

SS: Oh my goodness, I don’t think I could top her

 

JA: This is Sadie Stertivan, Henrietta’s cousin

 

SS: She was a beautiful girl. I was beautiful myself, but Henny was very pretty.

 

GX: Brown eyes, long hair

 

JA: and this is Henrietta’s sister, Gladys

 

0:19:31

 

GX: Nice tan complexion

 

JA: Everyone they spoke with zeroed in on the same few points. Like first

 

RS: she was really meticulous about her nails

 

JA: Always painted them red

 

RS: this very deep red

 

JA: And second, Henrietta just had this

 

RS: She was very--

 

JA: Strength

 

RS: Forthright, very sassy

 

JA: Like her cells

 

RK: [laughs]

 

JA: Now the unfortunate thing is when it comes to her life, you know how she lived. There’s not a ton of detail.

 

RS: October. So this is when she first ran into cancer

 

0:20:01

 

JA: But in that hotel room, when the two of them were flipping through the medical records, they did start to get some detail

 

DL: OK. Now here’s her autopsy

RS: Right

 

About how she died

 

RS: These are the things I’m gonna take notes about

 

JA: Was she in a lot of pain when she died?

 

RS: Yeah. Her--this was the hardest thing. She was eventually in a--in  apretty unbelievable amount of pain

 

RS: She complained of pain in her right lower quadrant

 

RS: Wailing and crying and you know, moaning for the Lord to help her and

 

JA: According to the records, doctors tried everything

 

0:20:29

 

RS: Morphine, they injected a hundred percent alcohol straight into her spine

 

JA: Wow

 

RS: In spite of the pain, in spite of the alcohol injection last week

 

RS: And she would have these fits of pain. Sort of spasm where these waves of pain would hit her and she would rise up out of the bed and thrash around. So they strapped her to the bed and her sister, along with one of her friends, you know, one of them would tighten the straps and the other would put a pillow in her mouth so that she wouldn’t bit her tongue

 

0:21:00

 

DL: The--if I only just had the chance to take care of her

 

JA: Now, dealing with how her mother died was one thing. But the cells made it more complicated

 

RS: For Deborah, her mother was alive in these cells somehow. So if that’s true, that left very big question. And the first of them for Deborah was, how can Henrietta rest in peace when part of her, part of her soul, is being shot up to the moon

 

0:21:30

 

RS: And injected with all these chemicals and radiated and bombarded

 

DL: It was just so painful knowing you know they had her cells on the back of a donkey

going to Turkey, you know, in airplanes. Just going all over the world, uh. I just don’t know

 

RS: You know, she worried about them--she worried that it hurt her mother when you infect the cells with ebola, does somehow her mother feel  the pain that comes with ebola?

 

JA: And had a scientist ever like sat down with her--

 

RS: No

 

0:22:00

 

JA: No. I mean just explain to her this is--

 

RS: No. No. Never. Nothing

 

JA: Because it just strikes me that it wouldn’t be that hard to explain like when you take cells out of a body it’s kinda like when you cut your fingernail off. It just doesn’t--

 

RS: But your fingernail doesn’t keep growing and living after you cut it off. It’s a, it’s really hard. There is no other example of some way you can take something from someone’s body and have it keep living and not have a person feel it.

 

JA: And all these worries, sasy Rebecca

 

0:22:30

 

JA: Began to build in Deborah’s mind. And build, and build

 

RS: There came this point--so we were

 

DL: Ah

 

RS: At her cousin’s house

 

JA: This is her cousin Gary

 

RS: She was broken out in hives and she was telling him all the stuff that she recently learned

 

JA: You can almost hear it on the tape, she says to him

 

DL: [inaudible]

 

JA: She can’t carry the burden of these cells anymore. She can’t do it

 

DL: I can’t [inaudible] I don’t want to [inaudible] anymore

 

RS: And I had been sort of trying to talk her down and he was trying to talk her down

 

0:23:00

 

DL: [inaudible]

 

RS: And then just out of nowhere, he just started, um, singing

 

GX: [singing]

 

RS: And he started preaching. He--

 

GX: There’s some things that doctors cannot do

 

0:23:31

 

RS: He held her head in his hands

 

GX: And we come to you tonight, the author and the finisher of our faith. And we thank you for being a wing maker, you make a path in the mighty woods, you called the mountains and skip like rams and the [inaudible] we thank you.

 

DL: Thank you Lord

GX: Thank you

DL: Thank you Lord

GX: Thank you

DL: Thank you Lord

GX: Thank you


/////

0:24:01

 

DL: Thank you Jesus. Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Amen, thank you. Amen. Amen. Thank you. Thank you, amen, thank you

 

RS: And she just… relaxed

 

DL: She’ll like that man, I feel lighter [laughs]

 

JA: She didn’t realize ti then, but that night, Deborah was on the verge of a stroke.

 

RS: Want to walk up and see the building?

 

0:24:31

 

DL: Wanna walk? You mean--

RS: He said it’s just up this hill

 

JA: One of the most striking moments of this story is when the two of them visit Hopkins

 

RS: How do you feel?

DL: Fine

RS: Yeah?

DL: So far so good

 

JA: And Deborah meets her mother’s cells for the first time

CL: I’ll show you that room and then I’ll show you the cells

DL: OK

 

JA: Because a scientist had finally contacted her.

 

RS: Christoph Lengauer, the scientist who invited us into his lab to see the cells, he had projected them onto a screen

 

CL: Don’t be confused, they look green here, OK

 

RS: They’re sort of neon green in this particular case because of the way they were stained and projected

 

0:25:05

 

RS: So they’re very ethereal looking. They’re very sort of--they glow, you know. I mean when you think about angels, right, you think about something glowing. Christoph turned on this screen and she just, you know, I mean Deborah just gasped. She just-- [gasp]

 

DL: Oh my god.

CL: This is about 200 times bigger than what they really are

 

0:25:30

 

JA: A swirling hurricane of cells.

 

RS: Did you say, all that’s my mother?

DL: Yeah.

RS: Pretty [inaudible]

DL: It’s hard to believe

RS: Yeah

DL: Oh my god

RS: Yeah

 

RS: Christoph gave--he gave her a vial of these cells that she could hold in her hand. Adn they came out of a freezer so they were very cold and she sort of rubbed her hands together with the vial in her hard, to sort of warm them up

 

0:26:00

 

RS: And sort of blew on them to keep them warm. And they she just sort of whispered to the cells, it was sort of incredible. She just raised them up to her lips and said, you’re famous, but nobody knows it.

 

JA: Just a week before Rebecca and I spoke in the studio, she got a call, that Deborah had died

 

0:26:30

 

RS: She had a heart attack and died in her sleep.

 

JA: OK, so, um. As you may know at this point, that segment was based on Rebecca Skloot’s book, the Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks. It’s an amazing book. It came out right when we released that piece

 

0:27:00

 

JA: It’s been a couple years now, and recently we met up with Rebecca in Chicago. Just to get an update

 

RS: It’s like the book came out and then it just--

 

JA: Because since the publication of that book

 

RS: The whole story just sort of exploded

 

JA: It just took off. Scholarships were named after Henrietta

 

RS: Henrietta was given an honorary doctorate

 

JA: Monuments

 

RS: Highway placards and historical landmarks and buildings named after her. There’s a

high school called Henrietta Lacks High, HeLa High for short

 

JA: Meanwhile, the book is exploding, she went on this like insane book tour

 

0:27:30

 

JA: Members of the Lacks family began to join her

 

RS: It started off with just Sunny Lacks would go and do a sort of on stage Q and A and

people started cheering. And scientists standing up saying, I want to tell you what I did with these cells and I want to tell you why this is important for me and I’m sorry it was hard for you. And people reaching out, i’m alive today because of this--a drug that your mother’s cells helped develop or, you know, I do this in my lab. I mean they just--it never stopped. It was just a flood

 

JA: Which is, in a way, what Deborah always wanted

 

RS: She wanted to go to every event

 

0:28:00

 

RS: She wanted to be on every television show. She had her dress picked out for Oprah

like you know, eight years before the book came out. You know, she was, Deborah wanted this. This was exactly what she always dreamed of

 

JA: But then, just last year, something interesting happens, interesting and troubling

 

RS: So yeah, so March 2013, this group of scientists from Germany sequenced the

HeLa genome and published it online, where anyone can download it. You just click a button. I downloaded it. It was just there. And they did not ask the family.

 

0:28:29

 

RS: And my initial reaction when I saw this press coverage was, they did what? Because

within the HeLa genome, there’s also Henrietta’s genome, and some of that was--50 percent of that was passed down to her kids, and 25 percent potentially to her grandkids. But one of the things--so they put out a press release when this genome was sequenced. And on it, it had a little, you know, frequently asked questions the press might wonder about. And one of them was, can you learn anything about Henrietta or her children from this genome. And the answer was no. Can’t learn anything about them

 

0:28:59

 

RS: and I do--and I believe that they believe this. But this is a misconception. You can in

fact learn about people and in fact you cannot even hide people's private information if you try. And so one researcher took the genome and created, essentially, a report on Henrietta’s genes. You have X percent chance of bipolar disorder, alcoholism, obesity--you--it just has this huge range of things, and some of it is, yes. There’s some real potential privacy violation

 

0:29:32

 

RS: Like with the alzheimer’s genes and things like that, bits of information about her

family, but--

 

RK: did Henrietta have, um.

RS: I will not tell you. [laughs]

JA: Well this report that this dude made, did he list all of these things you’re describing?

RS: Yes. So, and he sent it to me. So I called the Lacks’ and said, did, you know, did you

know anything about this? And--

 

JL: Rebecca had called

 

RS: And, you know, they did not

 

JL: And it kinda bothered us because we’re saying, OK, why wasn’t the family involved

with this decision making?

 

0:30:00

 

JA: That was Jerry Lacks

 

JL: Jerry Lacks Wie

 

JA: Henrietta LAcks’ granddaughter

 

JL: Back in the 50s you had Henrietta Lacks, her cells were removed without her family’s

knowledge, then you go in the 70s, my dad and his siblings, they took blood samples, used it for research. They didn’t give consent. Then you come 2013 and you have Henrietta’s--I felt as though it was her medical records being published publicly

 

0:30:31

 ///////

RS: You know, their first question was, can you get them to take it down? And so we can

figure out what it is, what it means. So I reach out to the scientist and said, the Lacks family, you know, has asked that you take this down. And they replied immediately, they took it offline immediately, and then I contacted Francis Collins who’s, you know, the head of the NIH. I also reached out to Cathy Hudson who used to run the Genetics and Public Policy Center at Hopkins and is now over at the NIH dealing with a lot of these issues

 

0:31:01

 

RS: so I reached out to them and said, somebody needs to try to help the Lacks family

and get consent. Somebody needs to go back, pretend like this si starting now, and doing probably what should’ve happened in the the first place

 

JL: And I’d say like a couple of weeks after that, several weeks after that, that we had a

meeting with NIH. It was my mom, myself, my sister, my dad, my uncle, my brother David, my sister Kim, my cousin Ron, Rebecca Skloot. She was actually on the conference call.

 

0:31:29

 

RS: all the NIH folks drove up to Baltimore.

JL: We googled their names, Dr. Collins and Cathy Hudson and it was like, ooh we were

kinda--we was excited. We were like, yeah, we’re sitting in a room with the director

 

RS: They all met

 

JL: Just to listen to everybody, listen to our concerns, listen to our questions. What can

be done, what can’t be done?

 

RS: the Lacks family asked about everything you could possibly imagine

 

JL: Went over, you know, the information about, you know, gene mapping, sequencing

 

RS: Just the basic science of genomes

 

JL: To get a clear understanding of what the genome meant to science

 

0:32:03

 

JL: We don’t want to stop science, but yet we don’t want certain formation to just be

broadly available publicly

 

RS: So they laid out three options. One was, we don’t release any of them at all. And

then there was a second option which was release it with no restrictions, just put it out there like the germans did. And then there was a third option which was release it with restrictions. So the NIH would house it on their own servers and that in order to get access to it, you would have to send in an application that said

 

0:32:32

 

RS: This is the research we’re gonna do. There would be a committee forum that was a

group of scientists and then some members of the Lacks family

 

JL: 

 

RS: One grandchild and one great grandchild

 

JL: My brother David and my cousin Veronica

 

RS: And obviously, this is the option they picked. So yeah, there’s this committee and

they just, a few weeks ago, saw their first batch of applications. And then the news hit and it was the first time that they were part of the news. So--

 

JA: They the third generation?

 

0:32:59

 

RS: Yeah--the Lacks family. Like Jerry Lacks was on MSNBC live doing an interview

about this and she--you know, she’d never done this before and, you know, they were in every newspaper. I mean it was everywhere

 

JL: Yeah. It’s pretty exciting, yeah. We are stepping into the spotlight. It’s the

grandchildren

 

RS: The third and fourth generation of Lacks’

 

JL: It’s the great grandchildren

 

RS: This is their story now. And that’s--the other thing that is an undercurrent through all

this is Deborah is gone

 

JL: She was the one who was just so forceful

 

0:33:30

 

JL: And so dedicated with getting the information out there about her mom

 

RS: And you know when I look at the four years since the book came out, you know,

there are a few moments that stand out as incredibly emotional ones for me having to do with Deborah. But this--the first meeting, sitting on the speakerphone, listening to this meeting.

 

JL: These high officials sitting at the table, and have sincere concern about our

questions

 

0:33:59

 

RS: If she could have said, what do I dream might someday happen? That would be what she would’ve described

 

JL: I can just imagine her just sitting there and she just laughing, rocking back and forth, twiddling her fingers, saying, yay. Just absorbing all of this, this excitement.

 

0:34:33

 

JA: Before we close, I want to thank Rebecca Skloot for giving us her raw tapes, her book, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks is truly spell binding. You can get more information at Radiolab.org, sign up for our podcast there, Radiolab.org

 

RS: [beep] hello, this is Rebecca Skloot, Radiolab is produced by Jad Abumrad, our staff includes Ellen Horn, Michael Rafel, Soren Wheeler, Lulu Miller, Tim Howard, and Pat Walters. With help Adi Narahin, Aaron Sand, and Sharon Shaddock. Special thanks to Tim Clark and Timothy Wizinsky. With a name like Skloot I’m allowed to stumble on people’s last names.